# trapezia
Scripts for Genomic insights from Natural History Collections reveal cryptic speciation in coral-guard crabs (family: Trapeziidae)

Abstract:
Found throughout the Indo-Pacific, Trapezia crabs live in the interstitial spaces of coral colonies, assisting their host by removing sediments, deterring predators, and increasing survival rates of juvenile colonies. Despite being essential actors of coral reefs and threatened by the ongoing degradation of their habitat, the difficulty of collecting Trapezia crabs has resulted in little genetic information being available for this group, including the exact number of species and their relationships. To overcome this limitation, we sampled Natural History collections, an important and underutilized source of genomic data for endangered, rare, or difficult to sample species. We used a combination of 166 museum tissues and freshly collected samples to reconstruct the Trapezia phylogeny and assess the phylogeography and population genetic patterns of the widespread species Trapezia bidentata. We used a novel approach optimized for degraded DNA to generate high-quality genomic data and recovered a strongly supported phylogeny of the Trapezia genus, clarifying species relationships of a majority of taxa and supporting the division of Trapezia into two genera. Within T. bidentata we identified four distinct genetic clusters suggesting high divergence and cryptic speciation in the Indian Ocean and the Marquesas Islands. Populations of the Central and West Pacific, showed signs of admixture across a heterogeneous seascape, attributing to a potentially long pelagic dispersal phase and expansive gene pool. Our results highlight the need to further explore the genetic diversity within other Trapezia species, as they are likely to exhibit more complex genetic patterns than previously understood.

Link:

Citation:
